   SHIRE HIGHLANDS EDUCATION DIVISION
2024 MALAWI SCHOOL CERTIFICATE OF EDUCATION MOCK
                                    EXAMINATION

                           AGRICULTURE
                                         PAPER I
                                        (100 marks)

                       PROVISIONAL MARKING SCHEME

                                   SECTION A (70 Marks)
1. a. Removal of excess water from the soil.                 ( 1 mark)
b. Sub surface, surface, bio- drainage                      ( 2 marks for any two)
C .Mulching soil / planting vegetative cover/(1) planting trees which helps to reduce
the speed of run – off controlling soil erosion (1)
Applying manure(1) which improve soil fertility(1)
Practicing crop rotation / including leguminous crops in rotation or including covers
crops in rotation (1) this reduces speed of runn off controlling soil erosion/ fix
nitrogen(1)
Practicing agroforestry (1) which helps to add soil fertility (1)

2. a (i) Anthracnose                          (1 mark)

   (ii) Applying fungicides such as benlate           (1 mark)

 (iii) Source of foreign currency after exporting to other country(1) hence improving
economic status of the country

source of employment in mango orchard or mango processing industry(1) hence
improving living standard of people (1)

Source of income(1) after selling(1)                      (4 marks for any two

    3. (i)
        % 𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒 𝑖𝑛 𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑑
PED =
               % 𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒 𝑖𝑛 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒



                                     (𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦)−𝑛𝑒𝑤 𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 ×100
% change in quantity supplied =
                                               𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦
                                               1
                                                       (400−300)𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑠 ×100
                                                   =                          ( 1)
                                                                400

                                                   100 × 100
                                              =
                                                       400


                                             = 25%                     ( 1)
                            𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒−𝑛𝑒𝑤 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ) ×100
    % change in price =
                                    𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒

                                                       (𝑀𝐾60−𝑀𝐾80) ×100
                                                   =                             (1)
                                                               𝑀𝐾60


                                             = 33.3%                  (1)

           EPD =                              25%
                                             33.3%

                                              0.75                    (1)


(ii) inelastic demand                                                   (1)

4. (i) animal power ( 1 mark)


   (ii)      They may damage the crops

             They may be affected by weather conditions
             They require extra cost in case of sickness
             Animals may not copy up with large acreage of land compare to tractors
                      (1 mark for any one )
   (iii)
   • .Farmers should not be harsh to animals/farmers should properly train animals
   • Animals should not be exposed to middy day heat. Early day or late day
     operation is recommendable.
   • Carts should not be overloaded with farm produce.
   • Animals should be given enough and proper diet
       ( 2 marks for any two)
   (iv)    easy transportation of farm produce and inputs ( 1 mark)
   (v)     State any two ways of maintaining the farm implement.

          • Lubricate all moving parts using oil or grease to reduce friction
          • Replace worn out parts
          • Repair broken parts
                                               2
         •   Tighten loose bolts and nuts
         •   Clean the implements after use
         •   Store equipment at dry place
         •   Make sure that tyres are at the correct pressure. ( 1 mark for any one)


5. a. Improving uniformity/colour/size/shape
      Increasing nutritive value of crops
      Improving processing qualities                           (2 marks for any two)
  b. (i) Introduction ( 1 mark)
    (ii) Differences in environmental conditions.         ( 1 mark)


6. (a) It is a cheaper source of feed(1) compared to commercial feed(1)
     • Pasture help to control soil erosion since the roots bind soil particles(1)
     • Leguminous pasture help to maintain soil fertility(1) since they fix nitrogen
       into the soil
     • Pasture help to control pests and diseases (1) sine they break their life cycle(1)
     • Pasture help to maintain soil structure when the leaves and roots decay to form
       organic matter.     (1)                     ( 4 marks)
    b. They contain high dry matter content hence high yield per hector
     •   They contain high dry matter content hence high yield per hector
     •   They have high protein content which improves nutrition status of livestocks
     •   They are typically more digestible and palatable which improves appetite of
         livestocks                                                        ( 4 marks)



c. (i)It helps to increase soil PH legumes plants perform better in medium basic soil
and perform poorly in acidic soil.
  Liming improve survival rate of rhizobium bacteria hence providing effective
nodulation.                                                  (1 mark)
(ii) Hulling increase the rate of seed germination
Makes pelleting of seed easier.                                     (1 mark)




7. a. Seed rate= 𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑡 𝑝𝑒𝑟 ℎ𝑎 ÷ 𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒 ÷ 𝑝𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦% ÷ 𝑔𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛%
    800000 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑠 ×1𝑘𝑔×100×100
=                                                       ( 1)
      ℎ𝑎×400000 𝑠𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑠 ×40×80

                                               3
= 6.25𝑘𝑔/ℎ𝑎                                            ( 1)



b. (i) Seed rate will increase                                           (1 mark)

(ii) To achieve the desired plant population(1) since the seed is mixed with trash(1)

8. a. Tick (1 mark)

b.
 • Suck blood (1)and causing anaemia.(1)
 • Damage hides through their biting wounds(1) and reduces quality of hides(1)
 • The bite wounds may become a source of infection/ mastitis(1) this reduces
   production(1)
 • Ticks transmit four tick borne diseases/East Coast Fever (ECF)/ Heart water/ red
   water and gall sickness(1) which can lead to death of cattle.(1)
                                (4 marks for any two)

c.       burning infested pasture
         practicing rotation grazing ( 1 mark for any one)


9. a. The ability of the soil to hold and release cations ( 1 mark)
     b. Applying manure /Applying organic manure/applying lime ( 2 marks)
     c. The high the bulk density, the low the porosity of the soil. ( 1 mark)


d. (i) A gihly consistency soil does not promote root penetration and development(1)
hence low maize production(1)

A highly consistency soil is poorly aerated(1) hence poor root and microbial
respiration(1)

A highly consistency soil becomes waterlogged(1) hence causes denitrification and
maize lack nitrogen.(1)

             ( 4 marks for any two)

10.


a.(i) Cap/ pileus( 1 mark)
(ii) For production of spawn/seed. ( 1 mark)
b. Maize stalks, rice straws, banana leaves, cotton wastes, sawdusts, maize cobs ( 2
marks for any two)


                                              4
c. Near the market-Mushroom are perishable, they should be grown near the market
for fast selling.
 Temperature -They should be grown at temperature range between 18oC to 24oC,for
efficient production
Near water source (1) for easy irrigation(1)
Away from pit latrine, to avoid flies which brings germs(1)
Availability of labour, Mushroom should be grown where labour is plenty since it
demands more labour.
near substrates materials, should be grown near organic materials for easy mushroom
production.


d. Prevent drying out of spawn
Promote mushroom body formation (fruiting)       1 mark for any one


SECTION B                  Essay Questions 30 marks

11. Explain five aims of livestock improvement                (10 marks)

   • To increase quantity yields of milk, meat and eggs(1) hence increase farm
     profit (1)
   • To obtain high quality animal products such as meat, milk, eggs, butter fat
     content in milk, size and colour of egg yolk, hardness of egg shells and quality
     of woo(1)l. These increase market demand(1)
   • To increase disease resistance in animals(1) hence decrease livestock death and
     increase yield(1)
   • To increase the animal’s adaptability to harsh climatic conditions(1)hence
     reduce livestock loss and increase production(1)
   • To improve the rate of growth(1) as the result animals reach slaughtering stage
     fast.(1)

12. Explain five factors to consider when mechanising a farm.
      Topography: Mechanization is easier on flat land than hilly land.
      Size of land: Heavy mechanization require large land, for easy movement of
      machines to generate enough income to recover cost of machine for easy
      movement of machine.
      Technical know – how: Farm machinery require some skills to operate and
      maintain.
      Availability of capital: a lot of capital is required to purchase heavy machines
      such as tractor and plough.
      Value of crop: High value crop should be considered when mechanizing the
      farm in order to recover cost of machine
      Availability of good infrastructures: good roads and bridges are highly
      needed for easy movement of machines to various parts of the farm.
                                           5
13. Farmers in Traditional authority Kalima grow maize every year and they are
privileged with the following resources:

   ➢ Soil testing unit.
   ➢ Credit cooperatives (SACCO).
   ➢ Agriculture Extension office nearby
   ➢ A big river passing through the village

Despite of having the above resources they face hunger every year Explain any five
ways in which farmers can utilize resources to ensure food security.

   • Soil testing unit would help farmer to know soil ph of their farms in order to
     select suitable crops to be grown so that they produce more food/.Soil testing
     unit helps the farmer to know texture type so that they can select suitable soil
     for their crops so that they produce more food.
   • Farmers borrow money from credit cooperatives and use them to buy farm
     inputs/ Improved seeds/ fertilizer(1) in order to produce more food(1)
   • Credit cooperatives allow farmers to keep their after selling their farm produce
     for future use
   • Farmers seek knowledge from extension office on how they can plan and
     budget their farming operations.
   • Extension officers train farmers on various new farming practices(1) so that
     they produce more food(1)
   • The river helps the farmer to cultivate more than twice a year(1) through
     irrigation(1)




                                          6
